Welcome back.
It's now time to discuss.
While loops in general loops allow us to repeat code multiple times.
The first basic loop that we're going to discuss is the while loop which will continually execute a
block of code while it condition remains true.
Let's see an example of this syntax.
Here we can see the find a variable x equal to 1 and we say while X is less than or equal to three colon
we have a block of code that will continually execute while the while condition remains true.
We will go ahead and print out the number x and then we see here and commented form there were adding
1 to the x variable.
So we reassign X equal to the previous value of x plus 1.
So as we continually run this loop we start off with X being equal to 1.
So we print it and then we add on one plus one to now x is equal to 2 then 2 is still less than or equal
to 3.
So we go ahead and print out 2.
Then we say two plus one is equal to 3.
3 is still equal to 3 so it's technically Lessner equal to 3.
So it prints out 3.
Once we have three plus one is equal to 4.
The while condition is no longer true because 4 is not less than or equal to 3.
So the while loop terminates as a quick note.
Be very careful of while loops because if condition is set to always be true then your while loop will
actually run forever causing your program to get stuck.
Let's explore while loops and a little more detail with Python.
Let's begin by cutting out a similar example.
What we just discussed.
We will say x is equal to zero.
And then while X is less than 3 Colan will execute some code.
We will say print X is currently and then we will actually prints the value of x Lotusphere and printing
the actual variable x not the string X..
So keep that in mind.
And then we're going to print still less than 3.
Add 1 2 x and then we'll actually do that here will say x is equal to x plus 1.
And then once we've done that we will print a new line using our special escape character and then we
run this let's see what happens.
We get X is currently zero.
Still less than 3.
Add 1 to x.
It's 1 still less than 3 at once.
X X is currently 2.
Still less than 3 Add one to X.
And notice right after we print this we end up adding 2 plus 1 to x is equal to 3 and since 3 is not
less than 3 it's equal to it.
We actually then terminate this while loop.
Now if we set X less than or equal to 3 and we run this.
You'll notice that we actually end up running one more time because 3 is equal to 3.
It's still valid for the while loop to continue running now as a quick note.
It's very easy to accidentally set a condition to always be true.
So let's say we just said while true and this is very dangerous to do because basically there's nothing
to kill this while loop will say Prince still true and we're going to eliminate this code and eliminate
this code.
So this is something you do not want to actually execute because it's going to constantly be printing
still.
True still true pretty much forever.
So when we run this you can see I have an asterix here and your computer may even slow down if you actually
run this and you'll see still true is constantly being printed out in order to kill this procedure.
What you need to do is either do control plus see if you're running this stop pie script a command line
or you can come up here in the notebook to kernel and then hit interrupt and it should interrupt the
kernel.
You'll notice it no longer has the asterisk indicating that it's no longer running.
And if you scroll all the way down you should see something saying keyboard interrupt so to restart
the kernel click restart and click that will go ahead and delete this do shift enter.
And now we're back and ready to go.
So let's move on to another probably more realistic example of when you may want to use a while loop.
So in order to do this we first need to show you how you can accept input from a user.
So in order to accept user input you use the input function.
So we have input.
Notice it's a special keyword since it's being highlighted and then you pass in a string and this is
the string that will appear to the user.
So we can say please input a number colon and then a space there.
Do shift enter in you'll notice you say please put a number and you have this little box show up if
you're running a PI script you'll still have the string print out but you won't see a little box.
It'll basically just be waiting for you at the command line free to insert something.
So let's provide a number to enter and you can see the output is the string to.
So input is actually returning this string version of whatever you input it.
So we can then say saved underscore input is equal to input and then when I run this I can input the
number two.
And then now later on I have X this variable saved and put as the string to.
So let's show you a little more practical application of using a while loop will create a little program
here in this cell.
It says Welcome agents and will create a passcode variable to be equal to zero.
So that's some sort of default pass code that we've already defined and we're going to say while
passcode is not equal to that's exclamation point equal sign 1 to 3 colon we're going to say pass code
is equal to the integer cast or transformation of.
Please provide your pass code.
So let's see what we're actually doing here.
I'm going to print.
Welcome agent.
I see a default pass code and then while the pass code is not equal to one 2 three I will basically
be continually asking for a pass code to be provided.
So I'm going to keep asking for the correct pass code.
So let's run this and see what happens.
It says Please provide your pass code and due to the formatting of me in the notebook.
You can see that the input is actually above that welcome message but you can ignore that for now.
It says Please provide your passcode.
Let's provide a wrong password two three four enter and see what happens.
And notice here now asks again.
Please provide your passcode.
We can provide another one by accident something like this three 5:4 cetera and it's going to keep asking
us until we finally provide one to three and then the code is done executing that while loop.
That condition is no longer true because 1 to 3 is equal to 1 2 3.
Notice here when I'm doing of I and t is I'm essentially transforming the string input of 2:59 into
an integer.
That way I can make the comparison here because technically when I do input Let's show you an example
here and I provide a number one two three.
The output is actually a string of that number.
So if I have one to three that's different than the number 1 to 3.
This is a string 1 to 3.
This is the integer 1 to 3.
So if I check for equality here it's going to say false.
They're not equal because different data types here.
One is a string.
One is an integer.
If I wanted to transform this into an integer I can use I and T and then pass it inside Similarly I
can actually do the opposite.
I could say SDR to transform this one into a string and then check for equality with one to three.
And the way you can find out what are these special codes to pass in I.A. for integer or SDR for string.
You'll notice that they actually match up with the result of type.
So if I say type 1 to 3 it returns back SDR in the key and that's a string that's also the same built
in function to try to transform variables into strings.
Or if I try to say type of the integer 1 to 3 it gives back I.A..
So it's a nice little connection between types and they're also they're built in function that attempt
to transform other types and knowing what we already know about control flow we could actually expand
on this simple example here and add in some more control flow to ask for or indicate that the pass code
was wrong so we can also say if passcode is not equal to 1 to 3 colon and the various levels of indentation
I have now I'm going to say Prince wrong password Prince please go again.
And then I will print a new line using that special backslash character and.
And then after all this while loop notice main Then station I'm going to Prince correct password.
So here.
How important in the notation is to organize your code.
Everything here is inside the while loop because it's indented.
Pass this while loop indicated by this colon here and then everything here is inside this if statement
because in the TD into this if statement and then finally this print correct password is only going
to execute.
Once this entire while loop is done executing because it's outside of this while loop because it's not
indented so nosey in the notation here and make sure your code matches the same indentation I'm showing
here on the screen.
So if we run this now and we're providing wrong passwords such as three four five it's going to say
please write your passcode wrong password.
Please go again.
And this is a way you can continually ask for user input until they happen to provide you with the right
password.
One two three and then it says correct password.
At the end.
Finally I want to mention one more key word and that's the break keyword break keyword allows you to
actually break out of the loop that contains the break key word.
So show me a simple example of this I'm going equal to zero and say while X is less than 10 Colan enter
Prince X and then say x is equal to x plus 1.
And if I just from this notice I will get back zero all the way up to 9 because once X's equal to 10
this while loop terminates.
But if I want to break out of this while loop prematurely I could say if on some conditions such as
x is equal to three and then I can say break and that's going to break out of the top containing loop.
So now when I run this notice here since x is equal to 3 here we immediately break and that breaks out
of this loop.
We'll go ahead and explore this break keyword later on.
But I just want you to be aware of it for now.
OK.
That's it for while loops.
Coming up next we're going to discuss for loops.
I'll see you there.